This is an ongoing project that will I will be working on from FALL2021 to SPRING2022. 


Here is a brief proposal submitted from UROP

**Title of Proposal:**  The Noetherian property of invariant rings  
**Problem/Topic of Research or Creative work:** A Noetherian ring is a ring that has the ascending chain condition, or the maximal condition, which means that any ascending chain of ideals of the ring must stabilize after a finite number of steps. The concept of Noetherian rings came to be after the German mathematician, Emmy Noether, discovered that primary decomposition of ideals is a consequence of the ascending chain condition in 1921. It is known that for a graded ring over a field, the Noetherian property is equivalent to the ring being finitely generated (‪Matsumura, 1987, p. 15). Emmy Noether proved in 1926 that the ring of invariants for the action of a finite group via k-algebra automorphisms of finitely generated algebras over a field k are in fact, Noetherian (Smith, 1995, pp. 26-27). In a related direction, a Noetherian ring containing the field of rational numbers, will have also a Noetherian invariant ring under a finite group action. The proof depends on the ring containing a characteristic 0 field, because it uses an especially useful formula, the Reynold's operator, that involves the inverse of the order of the given finite group to define the map between the ring and its invariant ring that turns out to be a projection. This however is not necessarily true in other cases.  
My project aims to construct rings R of characteristic p for each prime integer p with a finite group G acting on R such that the ring of invariants under this group action is not Noetherian. We would like to investigate weaker versions of the statement by figuring out if there is a class of rings or algebras that maintain the Noetherian property within their invariant rings. Some of the additional structures I will be looking into are non-semi-simple Lie-groups and their Lie-algebras. Additionally, I am interested in using the proof assistant, Lean, which has the implementation of Noetherian rings, to check the end results. Lean is a theorem prover and programming language that has been used to check the logic of the proofs of theorems and statements in mathematics.

**Relevant Background/Literature Review:** The proposed question first arose in invariant theory, a field that has a goal of exploring invariants of different mathematical objects, essentially trying to find all elements in objects that are immovable after specific transformations or group actions as is the case here. The beginnings of our project can be found in Hilbert’s Fourteenth problem (Hilbert, 1902, pp. 462-464) which was proposed by German mathematician David Hilbert. The question essentially asks whether certain algebras are finitely generated. Specifically, we first assume that k is a field and the intermediate field K, a subfield of rational functions in n variables over k. We now consider the k-algebra R defined as the intersection of K and k[x_1,…,x_n]. Hilbert conjectured that such algebras are finitely generated over k.  
  
There were special cases and classes of rings for which the statement applied, such as cases for n=1 and n=2 being proved unconditionally by Oscar Zariski in 1954, however this turns out to be false in general. (Rees, 1958) Zariski originally formulated the problem in a different manner, where the ring is given as a ring of polynomial invariants of a linear algebraic group over a field acting algebraically on a polynomial ring, or more generally, on a finitely generated algebra defined over a field. Here the ring R is given as a ring of polynomial invariants of a linear algebraic group over a field k acting algebraically on a polynomial ring k[x_1, ..., x_n], or more generally, on a finitely generated algebra defined over a field. In the nineteenth century, mathematicians such as Cayley, Sylvester, Clebsch, Paul Gordan and Hilbert himself were invested in studying the invariants of binary forms in two variables with the natural action of the special linear group SL2(k) on it. Hilbert himself proved the finite generation of invariant rings in the case of the field of complex numbers for some classical semi-simple Lie groups, such as the general linear group over the complex numbers and specific linear actions on polynomial rings, the specific linear actions being actions coming from finite-dimensional representations of the Lie-group. Hilbert's proof depends on the Hilbert basis theorem (Smith, 1995, pp. 25-26) which is applied to the ideal inside the polynomial ring generated by the invariants. Hermann Weyl improved the result by generalizing the finiteness result to the class of all semi-simple Lie-groups (Weyl, 1953).  
  
The first counterexample was proposed by Masayoshi Nagata in which he constructed a ring of invariants for the action of a linear algebraic group (Nagata, 1959). The counterexample is the polynomial ring in 32 variables under a field containing 48 elements that are algebraically independent over the prime field where the group acting on the ring is a 13-dimensional vector space over the given field. Then the ring invariant under the group action is not a finitely generated k-algebra and thus is not Noetherian. There is active research being done on the topic such as by Shigeru Kuroda who expanded on the existence of new counterexamples, including in dimensions 3 and 4, (Kuroda, 2004, 2005) as well as his more recent contribution to Hilbert’s fourteenth problem with field modifications (Kuroda, Hilbert's fourteenth problem and field modifications, 2018), another way to restrict a class of counterexamples.  
  
During Summer 2021, I will complete the independent study on commutative algebra with Dr. Josh Pollitz by using the books Introduction to Commutative Algebra by Michael Atiyah and Ian G. Macdonald and Commutative Ring Theory by Hideyuki Matsumura, as well as the research project with Dr. Schwede on Macaulay2 and power series rings. Both are preparing me to understand the literature that I will go through for the research project for Fall semester. If I manage to find the counterexamples that can be described in general by positive characteristic rings, it would bring a new class of objects that would contradict a generalized version Noether's statement about Noetherian rings and its invariants.
